[CONTP-377] add docs for kubernetes resources labels/annotations as tags (#25640)
DataDog/documentation: content/en/containers/kubernetes/tag.md

```bash
DD_KUBERNETES_RESOURCES_LABELS_AS_TAGS='{"statefulsets.apps":{"*": "<PREFIX>_%%label%%"}}'
```
{{% /tab %}}
{{< /tabs >}}

**Notes**: Custom metrics may impact billing. See the [custom metrics billing page][3] for more information.

<div class="alert alert-info">

This configuration option is merged with other configurations set in <a href="/containers/kubernetes/tag/#pod-labels-as-tags">podLabelsAsTags</a>, <a href="/containers/kubernetes/tag/#namespace-labels-as-tags">namespaceLabelsAsTags</a> and <a href="/containers/kubernetes/tag/#node-labels-as-tags">nodeLabelsAsTags</a>. In case of conflict, <a href="/containers/kubernetes/tag/#kubernetes-resources-labels-as-tags">`kubernetesResourcesLabelsAsTags`</a> take precedence while merging the configurations.

For example, if you have the following configurations:

```yaml
datadog:
  kubernetesResourcesLabelsAsTags:
    pods:
      foo: bar
      baz: qux

  podLabelsAsTags:
    foo: quux
    bar: quuz
```

The following mapping is used to extract tags from pod labels:

```yaml
foo: bar
baz: qux
bar: quuz
```

</div>

> {{< /tabs >}}

Reviewer: ```suggestion
```

```

## Tag extraction

### Kubernetes resources labels as tags

> Starting with Agent v7.58+, the Agent can be configured to collect labels for any kubernetes resource and use them as tags to attach to all metrics, traces. and logs associated with the kubernetes resource.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Starting with Agent v7.58+, the Agent can be configured to collect labels for any Kubernetes resource and use them as tags to attach to all metrics, traces, and logs associated with that resource.
```

> This configuration option is more generic and should be preferred over:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
This configuration option is more generic and should be preferred over the following options:
```

- podLabelsAsTags
- nodeLabelsAsTags
- namespaceLabelsAsTags

{{< tabs >}}

{{% tab "Datadog Operator" %}}

Each resource type should be specified in the format `resourceType.apiGroup`, where `resourceType` is the plural name of the resource.

> If a specific resource is in the empty api group (for example `pods` and `nodes`), it can be specified using `resourceType`.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
If a specific resource is in the empty API group (for example, `pods` and `nodes`), it can be specified using `resourceType`.
```

To extract a given node label `<NODE_LABEL>` and a given deployment label `<DEPLOYMENT_LABEL>` and transform them as tag keys `<NODE_TAG_KEY>` and `<DEPLOYMENT_TAG_KEY>` within Datadog, add the following configuration to your Operator's `DatadogAgent` configuration in `datadog-agent.yaml`:

```yaml
apiVersion: datadoghq.com/v2alpha1
kind: DatadogAgent
metadata:
  name: datadog
spec:
  global:
    kubernetesResourcesLabelsAsTags:
      nodes:
        <NODE_LABEL>: <NODE_TAG_KEY>
      deployments.apps:
        <DEPLOYMENT_LABEL>: <DEPLOYMENT_TAG_KEY>
```

> For example, you could set up:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
For example:
```

```yaml
apiVersion: datadoghq.com/v2alpha1
kind: DatadogAgent
metadata:
  name: datadog
spec:
  global:
    kubernetesResourcesLabelsAsTags:
      nodes:
       kubernetes.io/arch: arch
      deployments.apps:
        foo: bar
      pods:
        baz: qux
```

For Agent v7.24.0+, use the following environment variable configuration to add all resource labels as tags to your metrics. In this example, the tags' names for statefulsets are prefixed by `<PREFIX>_`:

```yaml
apiVersion: datadoghq.com/v2alpha1
kind: DatadogAgent
metadata:
  name: datadog
spec:
  global:
    kubernetesResourcesLabelsAsTags:
      statefulsets.apps:
        "*": <PREFIX>_%%label%%
```
{{% /tab %}}

{{% tab "Helm" %}}

Each resource type should be specified in the format `resourceType.apiGroup`, where `resourceType` is the plural name of the resource.

> If a specific resource is in the empty api group (for example `pods` and `nodes`), it can be specified using `resourceType`.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
If a specific resource is in the empty API group (for example, `pods` and `nodes`), it can be specified using `resourceType`.
```

> To extract a given node label `<NODE_LABEL>` and a given deployment label `<DEPLOYMENT_LABEL>` and transform them as tag keys `<NODE_TAG_KEY>` and `<DEPLOYMENT_TAG_KEY>` within Datadog, add the following configuration to your Helm datadog-values.yaml file:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
To extract a given node label `<NODE_LABEL>` and a given deployment label `<DEPLOYMENT_LABEL>` and transform them as tag keys `<NODE_TAG_KEY>` and `<DEPLOYMENT_TAG_KEY>` within Datadog, add the following configuration to your Helm `datadog-values.yaml` file:
```

```yaml
datadog:
  kubernetesResourcesLabelsAsTags:
    nodes:
      <NODE_LABEL>: <NODE_TAG_KEY>
    deployments.apps:
      <DEPLOYMENT_LABEL>: <DEPLOYMENT_TAG_KEY>
```

For example, you could set up:

```yaml
datadog:
  kubernetesResourcesLabelsAsTags:
    nodes:
      kubernetes.io/arch: arch
    deployments.apps:
      foo: bar
    pods:
      baz: qux
```

For Agent v7.24.0+, use the following environment variable configuration to add all resource labels as tags to your metrics. In this example, the tags' names for statefulsets are prefixed by `<PREFIX>_`:

```yaml
datadog:
  kubernetesResourcesLabelsAsTags:
    statefulsets.apps:
      "*": <PREFIX>_%%label%%
```
{{% /tab %}}

{{% tab "Manual (DaemonSet)" %}}

Each resource type should be specified in the format `resourceType.apiGroup`, where `resourceType` is the plural name of the resource.

> If a specific resource is in the empty api group (for example `pods` and `nodes`), it can be specified using `resourceType`.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
If a specific resource is in the empty API group (for example `pods` and `nodes`), it can be specified using `resourceType`.
```

```

For Agent v7.24.0+, use the following environment variable configuration to add all resource labels as tags to your metrics. In this example, the tags' names for statefulsets are prefixed by `<PREFIX>_`:

```bash
DD_KUBERNETES_RESOURCES_LABELS_AS_TAGS='{"statefulsets.apps":{"*": "<PREFIX>_%%label%%"}}'
```
{{% /tab %}}
{{< /tabs >}}

**Notes**: Custom metrics may impact billing. See the [custom metrics billing page][3] for more information.

<div class="alert alert-info">

This configuration option is merged with other configurations set in <a href="/containers/kubernetes/tag/#pod-labels-as-tags">podLabelsAsTags</a>, <a href="/containers/kubernetes/tag/#namespace-labels-as-tags">namespaceLabelsAsTags</a> and <a href="/containers/kubernetes/tag/#node-labels-as-tags">nodeLabelsAsTags</a>. In case of conflict, <a href="/containers/kubernetes/tag/#kubernetes-resources-labels-as-tags">`kubernetesResourcesLabelsAsTags`</a> take precedence while merging the configurations.

For example, if you have the following configurations:

```yaml
datadog:
  kubernetesResourcesLabelsAsTags:
    pods:
      foo: bar
      baz: qux

  podLabelsAsTags:
    foo: quux
    bar: quuz
```

> The following mapping will be used to extract tags from pod labels:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The following mapping is used to extract tags from pod labels:
```

```yaml
foo: bar
baz: qux
bar: quuz
```

</div>

> {{< /tabs >}}

Reviewer: This is either an extra unnecessary closing tag, or you are missing an opening one. It is causing the check to fail.

Author: Indeed, this is an extra unnecessary closing tag.

I removed it, but the pipeline still fails.

Reviewer: Let me try now.

### Kubernetes resources annotations as tags

> Starting with Agent v7.58+, the Agent can be configured to collect annotations for any kubernetes resource and use them as tags to attach to all metrics, traces. and logs associated with the kubernetes resource.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Starting with Agent v7.58+, the Agent can be configured to collect annotations for any Kubernetes resource and use them as tags to attach to all metrics, traces. and logs associated with that resource.
```

> This configuration option is more generic and should be preferred over:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
This configuration option is more generic and should be preferred over the following options:
```

- podAnnotationsAsTags
- nodeAnnotationsAsTags
- namespaceAnnotationsAsTags

{{< tabs >}}

{{% tab "Datadog Operator" %}}

Each resource type should be specified in the format `resourceType.apiGroup`, where `resourceType` is the plural name of the resource.

> If a specific resource is in the empty api group (for example `pods` and `nodes`), it can be specified using `resourceType`.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
If a specific resource is in the empty API group (for example, `pods` and `nodes`), it can be specified using `resourceType`.
```

To extract a given node annotation `<NODE_ANNOTATION>` and a given deployment annotation `<DEPLOYMENT_ANNOTATION>` and transform them as tag keys `<NODE_TAG_KEY>` and `<DEPLOYMENT_TAG_KEY>` within Datadog, add the following configuration to your Operator's `DatadogAgent` configuration in `datadog-agent.yaml`:

```yaml
apiVersion: datadoghq.com/v2alpha1
kind: DatadogAgent
metadata:
  name: datadog
spec:
  global:
    kubernetesResourcesAnnotationsAsTags:
      nodes:
        <NODE_ANNOTATION>: <NODE_TAG_KEY>
      deployments.apps:
        <DEPLOYMENT_ANNOTATION>: <DEPLOYMENT_TAG_KEY>
```

> For example, you could set up:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
For example:
```

```yaml
apiVersion: datadoghq.com/v2alpha1
kind: DatadogAgent
metadata:
  name: datadog
spec:
  global:
    kubernetesResourcesAnnotationsAsTags:
      nodes:
       kubernetes.io/arch: arch
      deployments.apps:
        foo: bar
      pods:
        baz: qux
```

For Agent v7.24.0+, use the following environment variable configuration to add all resource annotations as tags to your metrics. In this example, the tags' names for statefulsets are prefixed by `<PREFIX>_`:

```yaml
apiVersion: datadoghq.com/v2alpha1
kind: DatadogAgent
metadata:
  name: datadog
spec:
  global:
    kubernetesResourcesAnnotationsAsTags:
      statefulsets.apps:
        "*": <PREFIX>_%%annotation%%
```
{{% /tab %}}

{{% tab "Helm" %}}

Each resource type should be specified in the format `resourceType.apiGroup`, where `resourceType` is the plural name of the resource.

> If a specific resource is in the empty api group (for example `pods` and `nodes`), it can be specified using `resourceType`.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
If a specific resource is in the empty API group (for example `pods` and `nodes`), it can be specified using `resourceType`.
```

To extract a given node annotation `<NODE_ANNOTATION>` and a given deployment annotation `<DEPLOYMENT_ANNOTATION>` and transform them as tag keys `<NODE_TAG_KEY>` and `<DEPLOYMENT_TAG_KEY>` within Datadog, add the following configuration to your Helm datadog-values.yaml file:

```yaml
datadog:
  kubernetesResourcesAnnotationsAsTags:
    nodes:
      <NODE_ANNOTATION>: <NODE_TAG_KEY>
    deployments.apps:
      <DEPLOYMENT_ANNOTATION>: <DEPLOYMENT_TAG_KEY>
```

> For example, you could set up:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
For example:
```

```yaml
datadog:
  kubernetesResourcesAnnotationsAsTags:
    nodes:
      kubernetes.io/arch: arch
    deployments.apps:
      foo: bar
    pods:
      baz: qux
```

For Agent v7.24.0+, use the following environment variable configuration to add all resource annotations as tags to your metrics. In this example, the tags' names for statefulsets are prefixed by `<PREFIX>_`:

```yaml
datadog:
  kubernetesResourcesAnnotationsAsTags:
    statefulsets.apps:
      "*": <PREFIX>_%%annotation%%
```
{{% /tab %}}

{{% tab "Manual (DaemonSet)" %}}

Each resource type should be specified in the format `resourceType.apiGroup`, where `resourceType` is the plural name of the resource.

> If a specific resource is in the empty api group (for example `pods` and `nodes`), it can be specified using `resourceType`.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
If a specific resource is in the empty api group (for example, `pods` and `nodes`), it can be specified using `resourceType`.
```

```bash
DD_KUBERNETES_RESOURCES_ANNOTATIONS_AS_TAGS='{"statefulsets.apps":{"*": "<PREFIX>_%%annotation%%"}}'
```
{{% /tab %}}
{{< /tabs >}}

**Notes**: Custom metrics may impact billing. See the [custom metrics billing page][3] for more information.

<div class="alert alert-info">

This configuration option is merged with other configurations set in <a href="/containers/kubernetes/tag/#pod-annotations-as-tags">podAnnotationsAsTags</a>, <a href="/containers/kubernetes/tag/#namespace-annotations-as-tags">namespaceAnnotationsAsTags</a> and <a href="/containers/kubernetes/tag/#node-annotations-as-tags">nodeAnnotationsAsTags</a>. In case of conflict, <a href="/containers/kubernetes/tag/#kubernetes-resources-annotations-as-tags">`kubernetesResourcesAnnotationsAsTags`</a> take precedence while merging the configurations.

For example, if you have the following configurations:

```yaml
datadog:
  kubernetesResourcesAnnotationsAsTags:
    pods:
      foo: bar
      baz: qux

  podAnnotationsAsTags:
    foo: quux
    bar: quuz
```

> The following mapping will be used to extract tags from pod annotations:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The following mapping is used to extract tags from pod annotations:
```
